# Startup procedure

## Pressurizing water circuits

When the game is started RHR will be enabled in cooling mode. RHR should be disabled by disabling circulation and RHR pumps and closing all valves. This will allow to start building temperature with the decay heat.

Initial heat up and pressurization is mainly done with use of main pressurizer heater (PZR HEATER S). This procedure is introduced because the reactor is very unstable during heating due to strong negative feedback from temperature of the water. During the heat up phase rods would have to be pulled to account for the raising temperature of water moderator while when RCP cooling is introduced, with steam generators still cold, cool water would be injected into the core causing an immediate and strong positive power spike which could lead to severe damage to the unit. On the other hand heater is a reliable power source not influenced by water physics at all.

During heating, pressurizer should be monitored. In the initial phase all 4 heaters should be enabled which will increase temperature of the pressurizer giving comfortable distance for the main circuit from water boiling point. RCP should be enabled to around 5-10% to initially mix water between both legs (heater is installed in the left leg) and to initially pressurize the secondary water circuit. All preheaters in the secondary should be enabled and also steam injection into boron evaporator should be enabled, so it can be used later.

With temperature increasing in the primary above 200 degrees, more RCP flow should be introduced to pressurize the secondary circuit and to reduce temperature differences between hot and cold leg (cold leg strongly feels water temperature in the steam generator). Initially due to imbalance caused by the heater only left steam generator will start producing steam, its feed water valve should be adjusted accordingly to maintain proper water level. In the meantime, condenser should be configured by opening the bypass valve, enabling both CARs, two SJAE and enough circulation flow to build vacuum level to 40-70 mbar.

The goal parameters are around 280 degrees in the primary and few tenths of bars (up to 70) of pressure in the secondary with about 120 bars of pressure in the primary. In order to keep these parameters much more cooling should be introduced, more feedwater in the secondary and bypass almost fully open. This is to the fact the the PZR heater is very strong (1000 MW in the simulation). Just before reaching these parameters, the reactor can be initally started, but it shouldn't reach heat gaining levels (9-10 levels of the IPR) until temperature difference between hot and cold leg in of both primary circuits drop below 10 degrees and both circuits are at the same temperature.

## Reactor startup

Reactor should be put into IPR mode and shutdown rods should be latched and then pulled (top part of the diagram). With high water temperature and therefore low moderation, these rods shouldn't cause a dramatic raise in reactivity, but depending on conditions (fuel and xenon) some adjustments might be required. Larger groups should usually be pulled in fine speed mode. If SUR refuses to drop to 0 with shutdown rods fully pulled out, some boric acid should be introduced to suppress the reactivity. IPR needs to stay at zero in this stage. On the other hand if the SUR hardly moves, water should be diluted. After shutdown rods are fully pulled, next lower groups of rods can be used, although they will need to be latched first.

Typical SUR for reactor startup should be held at 0.5 with up to 0.8 decades if quicker startup is needed. It is very important to find the proper boron configuration for the reactor at this stage. If after pulling majority of the rods reactor is still far away from criticality (SUR drops close to 0) water has to be diluted to a moment when SUR remains more or less at constant 0.5-0.8 decades without any rods movement. This is the correct setup for building reactor power. In other words we are aiming at around 50-80% rods pulled and this should keep constant SUR of around 0.5.

IPR should be monitored and incremented. At around the 8th level of IPR, the pressurizer heater should be disabled and RVP flow reduced significantly to maintain a temperature of around 280 degrees in the primary. At the moment when the heater is disabled a sudden increase in reactivity could happen which may require slight push back of the rods or small boron injection, although if cooling is reduced this shouldn't pose a problem. At this stage operator should be sure that primary circuit has proper parameters i.e. temperature around 280-300 degrees, and less than 10 degrees difference between hot and cold leg for both circuits. If pressure in the secondary build up to 70 bars, the bypass should be adjusted to maintain operational pressure of 70 bars at all the time.

## Heat building

Initially operator should aim at around 480 MWt which is 20% of nominal reactor power. RCP flow should be adjusted to allow for steady temperature building over 300 degrees. While that happens, reactivity will be naturally suppressed, so constant rods pull might be required. Finally, parameters should be stabilised at this stage with 300 degrees in the primary at a pressure 120 bars and 278 degrees in the secondary with pressure at 70 bars. Primary temperature should be stabilised with RCP flow, and pressurizer heaters can be used to increase pressure up to 150 bars. Secondary pressure should be stabilised with proper bypass valve setting and water should be fed to both steam generators to maintain constant levels. At this stage also some balancing of the core could be done observing power range monitors.

From this moment when core is satisfactory balanced, no more rods' movement should be applied. Reactor should respond to steam demand changes and small adjustments should be done with boron injection/dilution.

## Turbine run-up

With bypass open, condeser should be setup to maintain around 50mbars of pressure (two SJAE are recommended and recirculation pumps at around 30%). The turbine is started by reseting the TURBINE TRIP switch. Initially, the turbine valve should be opened to around 5% and bypass closed accordingly to maintain a constant pressure of 70 bars. If done correctly, this should have no impact on the reactor, although small adjustments with boron concentration could be required. Maintaining constant pressure in the secondary is crucial to keep the reactor stable. Once turbine RPM reaches around 3600, synchroscope can be enabled (don't do it below 3500 RPM), turbine valve will have to be closed to maintain this value while bypass again opened to maintain pressure. Turbine should be synced at 3600 RPM with synchroscope pointing top. After synchronization, bypass can be closed and turbine valve should be adjusted to maintain constant pressure of 70 bars. Synchroscope has to be disabled because it would be damaged when turbine trips.

## Meeting network demand

PWR reactor physics work in a way, where steam demand should automatically adjust reactor power to meet the demand. This process is caused by interactions between both water circuits and the reactor itself. Let's assume that from a steady state of 480 MWt (which should give around 120 MWe) we open the turbine valve to immediately get 200 MWe. In that case, pressure in the secondary will obviously drop, reducing the boiling point. Lower boiling point will reduce water temperature in the secondary. This will increase the temperature difference between primary and secondary. The primary cold leg will get cooler and this will reduce temperature in the reactor. Lower temperature in the reactor hence higher water density will increase moderation and reactor power will raise. This will increase temperature in the hot leg, which will increase steam generation in the secondary naturally meeting the demand set by the turbine valve. Therefore, the reactor should more or less get a new state of balance at higher power satisfying given steam demand. Unfortunately reactor will swing forth and back like a pendulum around this new level of balance, so this behaviour will have to be manually damped by adjustments of boron concentration around the balance point.

This whole process has one drawback, as operating only the turbine valve will cause higher temperature in the hot leg of the primary circuit. If we started the process at 300 degrees, we still can let the temperature increase, although 320 degrees is the maximum allowed in the primary with 150 bars of pressure. Therefore, we should adjust RCP flow to maintain constant operational temperature.

On the other hand primary coolant flow can also be used to adjust generator load. Assuming the same conditions, if RCP flows are increased more hot water in the steam generators will cause more steam production. Higher flow will cool the reactor which will induce natural feedback raising power. Therefore the reactor power will adjust to this process of more steam generation, which will produce more load on the generator. This process also has a drawback as now the pressure in the secondary will be higher. Therefore in order to maintain the pressure, turbine valve will have to be adjusted.

To summarize. Two processes are used to change the generator load. One which is changing the turbine valve the other one is changing the primary circuit flow. Both should be used at the same time to maintain both pressure in the secondary and core temperature within the operational limits. Reactor power should self adjust to these changes although it might act as an pendulum swinging back and forth around the new power of balance. Therefore small adjustments to the reactor power should be made to dampen these oscillations and boron injection/dillusion should be the main tool to achieve this.

Operating the reactor properly requires a lot of experience so take your time to learn how it reacts to small changes and do everything slowly in small increments.

## Shutting down

Reactor is shut down either by full trip or by changing into shutdown mode. First reactor power should be reduced to around 500 MWt, then turbine should be tripped and bypass fully opened. Now reactor can be switched into shutdown mode killing power production. Next step would be to enable RHR cooling. With temperatue in the primary circuit cooling down also the secondary circuit will cool. Pre-heaters should be disabled. IPR range should be moved down to 0 and when all rods are fully inside the core, reactor should be tripped to unlatch them.
